# Migration to v0.5.3

`Only for local mode version under v0.5.2`

## Notice

1. If you are using a version older than `v0.5.2` then please upgrade to `v0.5.2` first.
2. If you are running in `cluster mode`, then you don't need to do anything.

Version 0.5.3 has a breaking change for local mode. It introduces `Sqlite` and `PostgreSQL` support for `metadata` and `file list` and dropped `sled db` support. So you need migrate `file list index` and `metadata` into new storage.

## Download v0.5.3

Download `v0.5.3` replace your old binary or docker image and then run it. If you go to the UI you will notice that there is no data. This is because the information about data is stored in metadata and file list index. So you need to migrate them into new storage.

## Migration

### Binary

If you are running binary version, just run the follow commands:

```
./openobserve migrate-meta
./openobserve migrate-file-list
```

If there is no error, congratulations, migration is done. you can login and start using OpenObserve v0.5.3 now.

### Container

You should use `debug` version image that allows you to login into the pod and run the migration command. The image name is:

```
public.ecr.aws/zinclabs/openobserve:v0.5.3-debug
```

After change to the debug pod, you can login into the pod, and run:

```
./openobserve migrate-meta
./openobserve migrate-file-list
```

If there are no errors, congratulations, migration is done. you can login to OpenObserve v0.5.3 now. If there are any errors, please report via github issue or slack.

You should switch to the normal image after migration is done as its smaller and more secure.


